I'm amazed that it took you three or four countries into the tour to decide whether or not you were writing a book.
Well, I didn't know.
I mean, it's like writing a novel.
I sometimes have written two or three chapters of a novel or more and abandoned it.
And I think, is this a short story?
Is it a novella?
Is it a novel or is it nothing?
And I have abandoned a lot of things.
And I've abandoned trips too.
About 1985, 84, 85, I went to Africa.
I was going to write a long thing about Africa.
I was traveling around Africa.
I went to Kenya.
Why did you abandon that one?
Difficult and depressing.
It was just very hard to get visas.
There was fighting in Uganda.
It was a very, very depressing story.
I thought, someday I'll do it, but there were places I simply couldn't go.
I went to Kenya, I went to Uganda, I went to Tanzania, and I thought, I'm going to leave this for later.
I can't do it.
I abandoned it.
And it was an expensive abandonment too because it's pretty far.
but i realized that there was that i couldn't do it that it that it wasn't a trip so therefore it couldn't be a book um do you find that this is the seventh travel book it depends when we're talking about uh anthologies or how long the book is it's the sixth long travel book i also wrote uh to the ends of the earth which is not an anthology i wrote um
A little book about Patagonia and a little book about going down the Yangtze.
Do you get jaded after a while?
I don't get jaded in travel.
I don't get bored with travel.
I think life is complicated.
I find it really hard to run my life somehow.
and so you know to be away for a long time is very inconvenient it's difficult on a marriage it's difficult on a household it's difficult on children
But personally, I find travel still very, very stimulating.
And I stay in a pretty lousy hotel.
The only way to write about it is to write about lousy... I mean, to stay in a lousy hotel, not to stay in a luxury hotel.
I don't have a problem with that.
As a matter of fact, I kind of like it.
I kind of like the challenge of staying in a third-rate place and saving a lot of money and moving on.
I still can't.
I mean, about a month ago...
I went on a bike trip alone and went camping from across the big island of Hawaii.
And people said, what are you doing?
I said, well, I want to go up Mount Mauna Kea Volcano.
There are some observatories there.
How are you doing?
I had a tent.
I had water.
I had food.
I loved it.
It was a kind of Boy Scout experience.
Do you have to keep physically in shape for this?
You can't be in bad shape.
You have to be in pretty good shape.
I think I'm in pretty good shape.
I do too.
You said you ride lights.
Oh, my syndicate, yeah.
You have to be in good shape to travel.
You have to be really emotionally and physically in the best shape possible.
Travel is an ordeal or it's a misery.
Because if you think that if you get easily depressed, if you get discouraged, if you had something bad happen to you, if you've got some kind of health problem, travel is the worst thing to do.
Travel doesn't cure you.
It actually tests you.
And so...
Some people go away thinking, oh, I'll go away, maybe I'll feel better.
They go away and they come back feeling much worse.
You say towards the end of this book that this was an unusual trip and that it was over.
You didn't feel like, you felt like you'd go back and do it again.
Yeah, because there are a lot of books...
I think that's a reflection on the complexity and density of the Mediterranean and on the fact that things change a lot.
Israel is slightly different since I left it.
Albania is different.
Croatia is different.
I'd like to go.
I didn't go to Algeria.
I really would like to go to Algeria a lot, but it's a dangerous, horrible place.
And so... And recently, you know, you read the papers yesterday and today about Algeria.
And you point out, because not only Algeria is in the news because they've been bombing Paris, but when they were bombing themselves...
40,000 people have died there.
You said that very early in the book, and also the fact that they seem to have a big background policy of killing apologists.
Yeah, and they kill them in traffic.
They walk through traffic shooting in cars, and then it's easy to escape.
If you're on foot and the person you shoot is in a car that's jammed in traffic.
So you wisely decided to screw in Algeria.
Yeah, unfortunately.
And Lebanon.
So if I went back, I'd go to all the places I didn't go, Lebanon and Algeria, and then a lot of places that had changed.
You also described the Mediterranean as kind of like going to museums.
I like that.
It's like going to museums and sometimes looking at the treasures and other times looking out the window.
Do you undertake a project like this with expectations that will ultimately emerge having any kind of focus for you as a very serendipitous?
Serendipitous, exceptional.
But serendipitous, and so you need terrific luck to do it.
But also, I make a great effort to meet people
but to go to places and i do a lot of planning beforehand in order for that to be possible for example going to the town where uh in aleano where price stopped at eboli takes place it's very slightly not on most maps finding it finding a way of getting
meeting people like Nagib Mahfouz or Paul Bowles.
I thought a lot about an event, how to meet them, what to say when, you know, plant that kind of plant.
The rest of it, planting where to stay, there's no planting there.
I never made onward reservations.
That's kind of fun.
That's a serendipitous part.
Any particularly scary moments?
Any war zone makes you anxious, except that it was the evidence of the war rather than the war itself.
The war had kind of come and gone.
The Serbian lines were about
say 10 miles inland in some places so i was on the right i was on the side of the lines that there wasn't any fighting but there had been fighting before i got there and when i left the fighting started up so i was lucky i got into a little window in some places
Even going from Damascus to Jerusalem, when I went and crossing, because I really wanted to go by land.
I didn't want to fly from one country to another in the Middle East.
I wanted to go, you know, bounce along and do it.
And I found that I could do that.
I went from Damascus to Jordan and Jordan to Israel all by land.
That was pleasant.
So you also thought I was in danger.
No, I didn't feel in danger.
I was cautious about it.
When I was in Turkey, I was near places where there was trouble, but I kind of stayed away from it.
Are there any epiphanous moments for you?
Like you mentioned, there was three countries before you, you still hadn't decided whether or not they'd be important.
That's a good question.
My epiphanous movement actually was
One was, I mentioned in the book, Albania, where it really is horrible.
When I arrived there, it was terrible.
I just started arriving, and it's really one of the most horrendous-looking countries I've ever seen.
There's nothing works, nothing looks, a road doesn't look like a road, a bus doesn't just look like a bus.
You know, I've lived in Nigeria and Uganda and places where
you think things are going to go wrong but actually albania is beyond that and then a guy showing me said you get here get on this bus which is a horrible vehicle he said joe and i said do you have any money i said no he said yes this is a very very poor hunter where someone someone gives you something this is um
That's a great experience, actually.
That's a very moving, very moving experience.
Someone actually handing you... Here, go ahead.
Any guy younger than me, poor than me, he's not begging.
He's giving.
It's a gift.
It really is.
In a true sense.
So, you know, a few of those takes you a long way.
Sometimes when someone says something, I get a kind of quill, because I think...
This is why I came.
I came to hear this, to see that.
And then sometimes when things are working well, like, got on a train in Venom, got on a train in Trieste, got on a train in Trieste, got off, changed trains in Slovenia.
And then I thought, I'd gone here by looking at a map.
I figured out that there was a line.
And here I am, this thing is working.
And I just was there, now I'm going there, and tonight I'll be there.
And when it all is kind of clicking, and I'm alone, I'm thinking, this is what I hoped would happen, and it's happening.
You know what I mean?
And so you think, it seems to be working.
Now you mentioned also that every night you work.
Yeah, every night.
So you're recording...
the dialogue as you remember it, the observations.
Yeah.
It is very strong and detailed, so these are really very visual books, I think.
Yeah, but I keep a small notebook during the day.
How many of those do you fill in, if that's likely?
Well, I make little notes during the day, and then at night I expand them and make them into a travel narrative.
A travel narrative, that's nice.
So filling up the... I fill up a big notebook and then I photocopy it.
Send it, keep it, send it on.
So you don't carry it with you the whole way, you're just sending it on.
Which is great.
It's actually very worrying.
If you write it longhand.
If you lose your notebook.
You bet.
I can't tell you, I mean, there are very rare occasions where I've lost the tape.
Unless you mindfully, you can't reconstruct it.
You can't reconstruct it.
I don't have a tape, so would you adjust yourself to that?
Why is that?
It makes people self-conscious.
I mean, I'm answering questions.
We're not having... We're having a conversation, but I know what the rules are.
This is different from... You're meeting me casually.
Let's say I didn't know you, and I met you in this restaurant.
You said... You're writing a book, or whatever.
You're a visitor.
And you say, would you mind if I... That would kill the conversation.
I mean... I want you to remember what I said.
But I suppose I'm also, I would be guarded if there are questions, I suppose, that I could refuse to answer or not answer, because I know you're taking a book, or something like that.
But anyway, an interview is different from a conversation.
Absolutely.
Two days ago, I was interviewing Leon Uris, you know?
And he was getting on pretty well, and the machine was off, and he was telling me something very, very interesting.
I said, gee, I wouldn't mind getting that.
And he literally put his hand, oh, no.
Who is this?
Leon Uris.
I always wanted to do an interview with him.
But at that particular moment, when I went to reach for the tape recorder to get this, it was gone.
he switched and became another person entirely.
I mean, he's talking to me very frankly, when he sensed that I was interested in getting this for possible use in the piece, he absolutely changed.
You know what, I mean, I don't think I've ever said this before, but I don't even show people a pencil or a pen.
I don't even, I don't keep a pencil showing in my pocket.
It's just so that, because if someone was looking at me and they were telling me something and they saw a pen, they'd think,
this guy's gonna write that down.
I mean, I don't want anyone to think about writing when they're talking to you.
I don't want them just to think about the story.
Well, when the guy recognizes you as a writer, he puts these silver titles in your books, and he asks you, are you writing about this?
at that particular point?
I denied it.
Sorry?
That's why you said, I don't know.
I don't know what he said.
I'm not sure.
I haven't decided yet.
And you said, and that's true.
That's why I asked that question earlier.
You hadn't decided.
I mean, you don't see anything.
I don't mean to use the word dishonest, but you're not misleading the subject.
No, no, no.
But on the other hand, too, you don't want to... You don't want to... Yeah, go ahead.
You don't want to watch it.
Well, even if I were writing it, I probably wouldn't say.
Well, that's a kind of a discouragement, isn't it?
I'd say, anyway, well, I haven't written it yet, have I?
And I don't know whether it would come up.
But the point is, you know, if you say to someone, I'm going to write this,
I think you're immediately making life a little hard for yourself.
So I don't want to mislead people.
On the other hand, if you go around, one of the worst things that can happen to anyone, I think, not just in writing but in life, is to have a recognizable face.
to be famous.
I think it's terrible.
I mean, I'm so glad I'm famous.
I'm so glad I can sit in a bus, sit in a train.
If I was someone else,
a familiar figure.
There are some writers who are very familiar faces.
Norman Mailer, for example.
You could always spot Norman Mailer.
As I have in a number of times.
Yeah.
At the airport and walking in, that's Norman Mailer.
And you can see, I had breakfast last week with Leonard E. Moy.
You should have seen, I mean, it's impossible.
I don't see how the question can go out in public.
Anyway, he may like it, though.
Because some people do like him.
Yeah, he's good.
Thank you.
I know Michael Crichton says it's impossible to go out to dinner.
He says it really bothers him that he can't eat.
He can't scratch his mouth.
You're constantly watching.
So Michael Crichton's travel book
such as it is or would be, would be pretty different.
Yeah.
So I can go on writing it.
No one's going to say.
When I give them, when I assign them hotel register, they might recognize it.
On the whole, people don't read very much.
So I'm not recognizing it.
And I usually put it down when I am.
Anyway, I like anonymity.
And writers, there's a little...
as a rule, really aren't celebrities with a very few exceptions.
Let's go.
And I think it's good.
I mean, I'm meeting Robert Massey here in about an hour and a half, right?
He's going to know who he is.
He's got a Pulitzer Prize.
He's made some wonderful books.
He's going to be a total mispeak.
He's going to keep that in.
I agree with you.
but obviously for the same reasons you never, for the same reasons you don't want to be seen with a pencil or a pad of paper.
The thought of carrying a camera would identify you as a tourist or somebody doing a... I wouldn't carry a camera.
Of course it's a heavy, it's a dead weight.
Secondly,
If I have a problem, if I take a picture of something, I don't look at it.
I don't look at the thing.
I say I'm taking a picture of something.
But if I'm not taking a picture of something, I look at it.
Or the person or whatever.
But it strikes to the philosophy of the kind of a book that you do, too.
And it really is.
Well, do you consider what you do an anachronism?
The way I do it, I think, is anachronistic.
Maybe not anachronistic as much as old-fashioned, I guess.
Deliberately not staying in luxurious places and traveling on the ground, forcing myself actually to do it slowly, to write in long hair, because I realize I'm
I'd rather travelling any other way.
If I was getting on a plane, it would be a different experience.
A plane, a computer, a meeting.
I don't look people up.
I don't look up, you know, someone says, you're going to see my friend.
I'd rather bump, yeah, I would rather meet someone casually and find my own way up it than meet someone and have them take me around.
I hate being shown around.
I hate being in a foreign city
looking someone up and they say, you've got to see this and you've got to see that.
I would rather just find out, yeah.
Whatever it is, just find out myself.
Now when you write, and you, I like the fact that you tell us about Blaswell's books and Flaubert and
You do this afterwards, obviously.
You do this kind of research afterwards when you get back?
Sometimes before, sometimes during.
I mean, a lot of these books I was reading at the time, some I had read before.
Then afterwards I read detailed books of history, let's say, or get to a place after.
What is this all about?
I mean, this is something I didn't understand.
I would do some research on it.
Sometimes afterwards.
In these days of instant communication, everything is on television, satellite chips, everything is in color, CD-1.
How does that alter, how does that influence what you do as a writer?
It doesn't make any difference, because when you say everything, you mean everything that's news, really.
Well, even we can see places there.
I mean, when people read travel books in the 1920s or the 1930s or the 1960s, you really couldn't see, you know, the Mediterranean unless they traveled there.
That's right.
And the way you can now, I mean, is that everything is available.
You can see.
But when I wrote about China, I was writing about a place where all the camera crews
were in Beijing.
They weren't in the provinces.
I saw people being really badly treated in the provinces in 1986 and 87.
In 1989, when the Tiananmen squad massacre happened, that was something that had happened before.
They had massacred students or killed students, and students had had demonstrations two years before, and I had seen them.
But there were no camera crews there.
In other words,
In a sense, the world is well covered by cameras, but there are no cameras in the bars that I was in, in Croatia, in Dubrovnik, in Albania, in Greece, in Turkey, in Syria, in the little towns.
There were no cameras there.
The cameras never recorded those conversations or those places.
There were much more obvious places, because it's expensive.
to film a place or to have a camera crew.
But if you just sent out a little guy like me, the spectacled middle-aged man going to some remote place in the hinterland, I mean, it doesn't cost anything.
But you can't do that with a camera crew.
Maybe it will happen.
There's a new kind of journalism, kind of video journalism, where a guy is just trapping around with a video camera.
That might change things.
But it hasn't so far.
In other words,
You say, but there still has to be a sense of narrative to it.
And that's one thing that the writer... That's what you do.
Yeah.
I mean, a story becomes... But also, I travel very slowly and inexpensively.
And that's part of the narrative.
And a camera crew tends to parachute in and then leave in a hurry.
I go to places where nothing's happening.
Television never goes to places where nothing's happened.
Where nothing appears to be happening.
Well, actually things are happening.
People having a good time or a tough time, they live, they die.
But you wouldn't think of this as journalistic, would you?
I don't know what it is.
I think what you said about it being an anachronism, I mean, is...
Green's book, The Lawless Roads, is that journalism or, say, labels, the Evening War book?
Is that journalism?
The Peter Fleming books about China.
In a way, it's somewhere between journalism and, I guess, documentary or journalism and fiction, I don't know.
I don't see it as journalistic because it's not reporting on an event.
It's confronting life in a lot of places and allowing people to talk.
It's not museum-going, but it's treating people as though they're your counterpart in that place.
And it's kind of ignoring history, too.
How important is story to you?
I mean, there's enough of us now as a channel.
It's very important.
As I do with a novel, characters are the story.
People are the story.
And so were the characters.
Yeah.
In a novel, say in Milroy or My Secret History or Ozone, any of those books, they're about people, you know, unusual people.
And so I guess...
it's looking sort of looking for people and um so this but they they're the story but they have stories too my favorite sort of thing is meeting someone and the person's telling me a long interesting story and then just saying i met so and so and he tells me stories like a like a conrad short story where he's saying well it was 1926 here and you see that hill
Some people began marching over the hill.
They looked like gypsies.
They came in a wagon.
They had horses and dogs, and they were playing music.
They came into the village, and then an amazing thing happened.
All ears thinking, yeah, then what, then what, then what?
And they kind of fill up the narrative and suddenly the place is a landscape that has life in it.
I mean, it's wonderful.
It happens a lot in Toronto.
You really do have an eye for detail, I have to say.
Even to the names of sandwiches, the Freud, you have the Freud.
That's funny, you know, and you didn't even remember what the Freud was, you know, and tomato and basil and all the way.
I love that.
Do you have a sense of who your readers are for these books?
No, not really.
I think they're people who...
I've read other books of mine, because I make allusions to that.
But I meet my readers, and they're amazing.
Actually, I once saw Jerzy Krasinski's readers.
They're all neurasthenic, middle-aged women with blazing eyes, rather hungry-looking.
And he met them, and he kind of had blazing eyes, too.
And then I was at a literary dinner.
Jerzy Kosinski, Stephen King, and I. Yes, it was in Pittsburgh.
And probably the last time Stephen King ever did anything.
I think he said that.
I think he said, I'm going home and finish my novel.
I'm not going to do it.
my readers were all sorts they were little old ladies they were students you know they cut across the socioeconomic spectrum they write me letters they're all sorts they're sometimes very elderly they're very young i met in new york you know you meet them when they when you do public speaking
I don't have a reader, except I think my readers are intelligent, and they have read other things that I've written.
Do you think that the readers of your travel books are generally the same people who read your pictures?
I think there's some crossover.
There are people who...
who prefer or say they prefer travel and others who say they're fiction.
But they tend to read both.
Well, I'm the same guy, you know.
And there's a lot of landscape in my novels and a lot of character in the travel book.
So I think it ought to be a fairly satisfying experience.
Which is the more challenging job for you?
To write a novel or to write a travel book?
A novel.
The novel is a very difficult enterprise.
Very difficult.
Even though physically, something like this takes more physically out of you.
Yeah, but that's nothing.
That's like mountain biking up Mauna Kea.
I'm looking at a comparison here.
Yeah, well, you do it.
You just plan it.
You know you can do it.
If you're in good health, you're optimistic, your bills are paid, everyone's happy, get on your bike and go.
And you've got time.
Right.
But you go into a room and you say, I'm going to...
I'm going to write something.
I've been writing pieces for The New Yorker.
You know, I don't know whether you saw them, but there were two this summer.
Go ahead and write.
This is fiction.
Very difficult to do.
It takes time.
You spend days when nothing happens.
I mean, everyone knows that.
You've talked to lots of people who've told you that.
That never happens in travel.
Travel, nothing's happening.
You leave.
Go to another place.
Talk to somebody else.
Make it happen.
No one has any justification for having a bad day, or a bad two days traveling.
You have a bad day and then go somewhere else.
But with fiction, it goes on for a long time.
Some writers, unfortunately, it goes on for years.
Was this a mindful attempt to replicate the Grand Tour?
Yeah, in some respects.
Because the Grand Tour was kind of the getting of wisdom.
It was a way of finding out about the world.
And the Mediterranean was the object of the Grand Tour.
People on the Grand Tour went to France, went to history, went to Germany, went to the northern Mediterranean.
And I thought, well, I'll do it, but I'll do it with a Grand Tour with a good day.
And the idea of a Grand Tour, or even tourists, you know, kind of a, in historical terms, it's not an early concept.
It's the 18th century.
But...
But people have been traveling in the Mediterranean since, you know, St.
Paul, for example.
You know, St.
Paul was the religious pilgrim.
But St.
Paul went everywhere.
It's hard to go to a place in the Mediterranean where St.
Paul didn't go, or the Crusaders didn't go.
Well, the Phoenicians didn't go.
But I mean, it's just successive waves.
It's wonderful, really, because you're constantly bumping in.
Everyone leaves behind the paraphernalia of their visit.
Well, I love that one guy you run into and he directs you to a place where Odysseus visited.
He was so pleased that he didn't say there was a great restaurant there.
No, he said the Lestragonians.
The Lestragonians.
It's amazing.
It was in Corsica.
Yeah, it is nice.
And you talk about residences from, you know.
Yeah, they're not saying, you know, Fellini made a movie here.
There's a famous murder here.
They're actually saying, Ulysses came here.
And it's a particular thing.
And it's in the Odyssey.
Well, there was a guy some years ago who actually tried to...
following the Odyssey, I guess, by reading the Odyssey.
It's not accurate geographically.
Some of it is and some of it isn't.
I read several books on the subject.
There's several places where
You know that, like, Scylla and Charybdis, the Straits of Messina, definitely.
Bonapaceo and Torsica, definitely.
Gervo, definitely.
Ulysses went all those places.
And then also Ithaca, you know, it was from Ithaca.
So the Greek places.
And Troy, but there's other, you know, a lot of it is, first, Homer might not have existed, so it might be just an oral... Well, some of you had to write those poems, though.
In fact, if Shakespeare wasn't Shakespeare, some of you did Shakespeare.
Well...
It does reflect one voice, don't you think?
It would be, but on the other hand, there's poetry.
We know Somalia from our ID, right?
But Somalia has the greatest old tradition in poetry outside of Greece.
There are poems in Somalia that are recited by singers all now.
chanters, poets.
The poems are hundreds of years old, maybe centuries old, maybe a thousand years old.
They're still reciting them.
They've never been written down.
They were never written down by the Italian missionaries.
Yeah, but the language, well now they have them.
But until, let's say, the 30s, 1930s, people were just going into villages and reciting these very, very long, elaborate poems about the deeds of great heroes.
In Hawaii, people chanted the genealogies of, you know, great man who did this, who did that, who related to it.
It's very similar to the Greek tradition, I think, of reciting.
So I'm not saying that was the case, but it could have been the case.
It easily could have been the case.
People say, how would they remember it?
How do the Somalis remember these enormous poems?
And people start reciting and then someone takes up and they go on and on.
Well, this is the sixth major travel book.
You look on the shelf, I don't know how many titles you have, but I didn't get to the cover today.
It's quite an impressive, but... About 30 through 33 pages.
Do you finish a novel as you did last year and say, it's time to... You're feeling the call, the sirens drop, to go out and do a travel book?
Um...
And there's still one or two continents you haven't... Oh, there's lots of places I haven't, but... I would say, if I don't... If I haven't got a book bursting in my brain, rather than sit around and worry about, you know, because anyone can write.
You can do journalism.
I do interviews.
I visit places.
I do travel stuff.
I go write pieces.
asked me recently if I would do something about William Burroughs, for example.
They say, we'd like to take a train, we'd like to do this, we'd like to visit this destination.
And I sometimes say, but rather than do that, if I can't, if I'm going to go into that, I would imagine a long trip.
I mean, I find that the
that the temptation to take a long, interesting trip is better than just to do a week here or a week there.
And it's very satisfying.
So, I mean, the answer is, ideally, I sometimes think I have a really lucky life because
There are a lot of writers who, if they're not writing a novel, are worrying about not writing a novel.
If I'm not writing a novel, I think that I'll go somewhere.
I may not get an idea, but I love travel, even if I weren't writing about it.
A long ago, I was in Ecuador.
I loved being in Ecuador, a bird watcher.
I didn't write about it.
I don't need to write about travel, but I need... At some point, though, is there a switch that goes on to say, you know, there's something here I could write about.
And then you have to switch modes and all of a sudden become a writer as opposed to really a traveler?
Well, there's a great incentive to write...
a travel book, what you write about travel is to sing for your supper.
This is paying your way.
Travel's expensive.
Also, I realize that when I'm writing a travel book, I'm accounting for that whole period of my life, a year or two years or eight months, whatever it is, the whole time that I've been traveling is a kind of, it's an autobiographical experience, too.
Let's check.
Yep, we're fine.
So the idea of having a record of everything that you did for that period is interesting.
Well, you do have two publishers, and you do kind of separate your two lives, don't you?
Your two writing lives.
What, the Houghton Riff one for the fiction, and Houghton for the travel?
It has been.
Well, Random House has done fiction.
I'm sorry, Random House.
You wouldn't have written Houghton.
I have, but I was years with him.
Yeah.
But in any case, why is that such a practical situation for you?
Why not do everything, you know, different editors, I gather.
It's better, you know, some publishers work better with certain books.
I think Cotton's excellent publisher for non-fiction, particularly for my travel.
Random House is a great tradition as a publisher of fiction.
A really good author there, Joe Mark.
So it's just a happy arrangement.
It was with Houghton Nicklin, too, but publishers change.
Houghton, in particular, has changed dramatically.
It's not the same, but when I first met you, what's the telegram one?
Ed Miffin was a small Boston firm that was publishing on authors.
I mean, they weren't publishing a single book.
I figured I was there, you know.
And it did.
It became, well, the market determined it.
It had to become bigger and they had to get more interested in blockbusters.
It's not the same place.
Is Joe Cannon still there?
Joe who?
Joe Cannon.
I don't know.
He was the head of it.
I really don't have much contact with them.
I deal with a publicist in New York.
Who's that?
Irene Williams and Marjorie Glaser.
They're two publicists in New York.
Good moment, right?
No, just off the record, I sometimes wonder what happened to all of them.
The publicist that came down the line.
Christina Rego.
She's gone.
Sandy Goroff is the left.
Ellen Emerson.
Where are they going?
I'm not going to ask you questions about the book, because Ben's obviously speaking.
Did you hope to find anything that your predecessors had missed?
Because there are so many drama writers that have been to me.
That's the challenge.
Going to a place which is almost a cliche, going to the Mediterranean.
I said Albania's in the Mediterranean, Lebanon's in the Mediterranean, Libya, Algeria, Croatia.
There's a lot of places in the Mediterranean that aren't the Riviera.
So it's actually...
The thing to do is... Right, so look at the whole thing.
It's like, when I wrote about England, Britain, a lot of people thought, it's a little hard.
Britain's a really nice place.
When they thought about Britain, they think, Britain's really England, and England is just green lawns and people playing tennis.
Well, that's not true.
So a lot of people thought, my book was a little hard on them.
And that I had somehow got the wrong end of this thing.
Well, I wasn't.
I mean, it's a lot of different things.
I mean, it's amazingly complex.
There's rich, there's poor, there's prosperous, not prosperous.
You know, old people, retired.
this pollution.
Everything in Britain is on its coast.
And the Mediterranean is insane.
Some people think the Mediterranean is just the sun-drenched part of Italy.
So I took a step back and I thought, this whole thing is the Mediterranean.
I'm going to try to do the whole thing.
It's a challenge, but it's more in how much time you have and whether you have the stomach for it.
So I think the race goes to the people who really lasted.
Do you get a little pressier as you get older doing this, or do you still have the same enthusiasm as breakfast?
I have a lot of what I intend to irony people take as Frankie.
I mean, I find, like the Evelyn Moore book, I find that kind of... He talks about a wine smelling like evening... He says it smells like evening newspaper.
It has a taste like evening newspapers.
I don't know.
The quotations that I use from labels...
people say oh he's just an old curmudgeon actually it's very funny it's a very funny book and i find that funny english people find it funny if i mean they did but some people are very very threatened by by that i don't exaggerate i don't think and i don't lie i i i was in chicago yesterday and i had a brief
session at the Art Institute.
Do you know a painter called Ivan Albright?
Ivan Albright, Ivan Lee Lorraine Albright, was famous for being able to paint rotting flesh.
His portraits are of, they look grotesque.
The titles are... Of America?
Chicago, yeah.
Although he went to Woodstock, Vermont in the 1960s and I think spent a lot of time there.
But he's Chicago's great
punk painter.
And he really is great.
But I was, I read, anyway, you look at the paintings, the paintings are amazingly frightening.
And they're all, they're portraits or this picture of a door.
The door took him 10 years to do.
Anyway, he said, I've often been accused of
of being ghoulish or doing, you know, horrible pictures.
He said, but I think that of myself as a painter, perceives life clearly and honestly.
He's, you know, he's kind of like the portrait of Dorian Gray, you know, horror.
I think he did the pictures for Dorian Gray.
What would move a man to do a lot of flesh?
will not be terrible they're not they're corpse-like people but he said i've seen that clearly and honestly yes black please are you mindful of the time no we'll move pretty soon okay
Yeah, what we'll do is have a coffee and then I'll hit these two bookstores.
Okay.
I've been inscribing this from the right of waiting for your phone.
I've got a pen.
I've got one.
I've got to have one.
I'll give you my card.
But where is my phone?
Here it is.
Yeah, thanks.
Yeah, I'm still on the cable.
I saw you down there.
Do you still go down there?
I always have a house down there.
Do you have kids?
I do.
I know you do.
I remember Christina Rego because one time she was supposed to arrange a meeting and it didn't happen.
Between you and I?
Yeah.
She said he can't.
It was a real screw up.
We were supposed to meet and she said I couldn't do it.
But in fact, I couldn't do it.
Can I give you the... Yes.
So, yeah, it was a long time ago.
What's next, do you think?
I'm writing a script, a Merchant Ivory script, for a movie, adapting a book.
And next book, I've been working on...
I don't know whether you saw them in the New Yorker this summer or two.
I've published several in Granta.
It's from a fictionalized autobiography.
It's an autobiography, my life story, but it's completely...
Paul's.
That's right.
Yeah.
So who do you publish that one with?
That will be... Is it kind of crisis?
You know, I haven't actually... It's kind of crisis generously, isn't it?
In a way.
Yeah.
But to tell you the truth, I haven't thought about publication.
I've just been thinking about writing it.
You haven't really started it.
No, no.
I've done a lot of it.
But I've published a couple.
That's what I say.
Okay.
And what would be a future travel project for you?
Well, there's a lot of places that I haven't been.
Of course, there's all those places I missed in the Mediterranean.
I've never been to Brazil.
I've never... I've never been to really obvious places, Scandinavia.
I haven't seen a lot of the States, you know.
I've never been to the Philippines.
Well, a States piece in the book would be interesting, wouldn't it?
Could be.
Because, I mean, you have a particular idea of your life as kind of an expatriate.
It's finding out, it's working out how to write it.
I mean, I don't know.
I don't know how I feel about that.
Yeah, you need an itinerary.
You need a reason.
You need a coastline.
You need a river.
And every one of your books, travel books, does have that premise.
Yes, there's a premise.
And all books about the states that are good have a premise.
They have blue highways.
They have travels with Charlie.
They have down the Mississippi River.
They have Route 66.
You know, whatever it is.
You need, otherwise,
What's it about, you know?
Or what's the structure?
It's very arbitrary anyways, but you need something a little more rigorous than that.
So if you think of one, like, oh, the town's called Springfield, or a certain highway.
I mean, ideally, it's a road that takes you from Bangor, Maine, to Los Angeles.
But then you miss out a lot, too.
Major League Baseball Park.
But you know what I mean?
There has to be something.
And it's got to be on the ground.
You can't fly.
Thanks.
You can't fly from place to place.
I think we've got plenty of stuff.
OK.